Anthony P. Monaco became the thirteenth president of Tufts University on August 1, 2011. An accomplished leader, scientist and teacher, Dr. Monaco brings to the Tufts presidency deep-rooted commitments to academic excellence, diversity, access and inclusion, a global perspective, and a keen awareness of the power of higher education to impact individuals and society.
Under President Monaco’s leadership, the university has identified strategic directions and key initiatives that will support and enhance Tufts’ longstanding commitments to innovation, collaboration, civic life and global perspectives.  The recommendations of the comprehensive T10 strategic plan approved by the Board of Trustees in November 2013 are now being implemented across the university. Tufts is also actively engaged in long-term capital planning to support needed improvements in facilities and systems that sustain teaching, research and campus life. In concert with President Monaco’s commitment to broaden access to a Tufts education and contain costs, the university has successfully implemented a series of major initiatives to use its administrative and financial resources more effectively—a project known as Tufts Effectiveness in Administrative Management (TEAM)—and continues to enhance administrative processes to support student and faculty needs.
Major educational initiatives of President Monaco’s tenure have included the acquisition of the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, enhancing the arts at Tufts.  President Monaco is also deeply committed to the wellbeing of the campus community and currently chairs university-wide councils or steering committees dedicated to advancing diversity and inclusion, preventing  sexual misconduct, and supporting sustainability at Tufts.  Each of these efforts builds on a comprehensive assessment of how Tufts could best put its values and institutional commitments into practice.
From his first days at Tufts, President Monaco has been active in campus activities. He is a regular spectator at athletic events and routinely enjoys students’ music, dance, drama and other performances. He participates in training sessions for members of the Tufts community preparing for the Boston Marathon and supports them at the annual race. Many days he can be found swimming in the Hamilton Pool or joining students for a meal in one of the dining halls on the Medford/Somerville campus.
As pro-vice-chancellor for planning and resources at Oxford University from 2007 until his arrival at Tufts, Dr. Monaco developed and led strategic-planning initiatives for academic programs, capital improvements and budgeting and resource allocation. He was an active steward of programs to make an Oxford education possible for students from a range of backgrounds.
A distinguished geneticist, Dr. Monaco’s doctoral research led to a landmark discovery: the gene responsible for X-linked Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies. At Oxford, he led the Neurogenetics Group, a team of scientists investigating the genetic underpinnings of such neurodevelopmental disorders as autism, specific language impairment, and dyslexia. His research group was the first to identify a gene (FOXP2) specifically involved in human speech and language. Dr. Monaco directed Oxford University’s Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics from 2007-2011 and was then appointed as pro-vice-chancellor for planning and resources.
At Tufts, President Monaco holds faculty appointments as a professor of biology in the School of Arts and Sciences and as a professor of neuroscience at Tufts University School of Medicine.  A native of Wilmington, Delaware, he received his undergraduate degree from Princeton University in 1981, and his M.D. and Ph.D. through Harvard Medical School’s Medical Scientist Training Program, where he specialized in the genetics of neurological disorders.
President Monaco was elected to the European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO) in 2006, and is a fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences (U.K.) and the Royal Society of Medicine and a member of the Association of American Physicians.
President Monaco chairs the Steering Committee of the Talloires Network, whose more than 350 member institutions around the world are committed to advancing civic engagement in higher education. He is President of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of Massachusetts and a member of the Executive Committee of the New England Small College Athletic Conference. He also serves on the boards of Cummings Foundation, the MacJannet Foundation, the Omidyar-Tufts Microfinance Fund, Tufts Medical Center, and WGBH, and sits on the board of trustees of the Salesianum School in Wilmington, Delaware, from which he graduated.
President Monaco is married to Zoia Monaco, Ph.D., a molecular geneticist who investigates chromosome and genome stability in stem cells. They have three sons. President Monaco enjoys reading history and fiction and keeps fit by swimming and running.
Anthony P. Monaco became the thirteenth president of Tufts University on August 1, 2011. A distinguished geneticist, he had served as the pro-vice-chancellor for planning and resources at the University of Oxford since 2007. An accomplished leader, scientist and teacher, he brings to Tufts deep-rooted commitments to academic excellence and inclusion, a global perspective and an understanding of the consequential role that universities have in society.
President Monaco holds faculty appointments as a professor of biology in the School of Arts and Sciences and as a professor of neuroscience at Tufts University School of Medicine.
At Oxford, President Monaco developed and led strategic planning initiatives for academic programs, student recruitment, senior academic appointments, capital improvements and budgeting and resource allocation. His leadership ensured that appropriate resources were allocated to support excellence in teaching, research and wider engagement with society. He was an active steward of programs to broaden access to an Oxford education.
A native of Wilmington, Delaware, President Monaco received his undergraduate degree from Princeton University in 1981, and his M.D. and Ph.D. through Harvard Medical School’s Medical Scientist Training Program, where he specialized in the genetics of neurological disorders. His doctoral research led to a landmark scientific discovery: the gene responsible for X-linked Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies.
Prior to serving as pro-vice-chancellor at Oxford, President Monaco had directed the university’s Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics since 1998. Under his leadership, the Wellcome Trust Centre doubled in size: it is now the largest externally funded, university-based research center in the UK. He also led Oxford’s Neurogenetics Group, investigating the genetic underpinnings of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism, specific language impairment and dyslexia. The group was the first to identify a gene specifically involved in human speech and language.
Monaco was born in Wilmington, Delaware and graduated from the Salesianum School in 1977.[5][6][7] He earned an undergraduate degree as an independent concentrator in neuroscience and behavior at Princeton University in 1981 and played goalie on their men's water polo team.[8]
Monaco earned his Ph.D. in Neurobiology from Harvard University in 1987 and his M.D. in 1988 from Harvard Medical School. His doctoral research led to his landmark discovery of the gene responsible for X-linked Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy. His fascination with genetics took him to the U.K., then the hub of this burgeoning field. He worked on the human genome project at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (now Cancer Research UK) in London and in the human genetics laboratory at the Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford.[9]
As a distinguished neuroscientist, Monaco identified the first gene specifically involved in human speech and language. Nobel Prize winning biologist Paul Nurse states, "Tony Monaco was among the first to recognize the importance of what was still an emerging research frontier, human genetics, and its vast potential to address problems
Where do we find creative communities at Tufts? Perhaps our first instinct is to begin our search in physical space: Tufts has dozens of performance groups, ensembles and unique publications, as well as an Arts Haus and a Crafts House. There’s also the SMFA, art studios in Lane Hall, the Crafts Center and the Tufts Art Gallery. While this approach yields a vast number of artistic options, it misses a critical demographic: the Tufts communities that are not visible in our physical environment, but rather exist in our virtual world — not ‘at Tufts,’ but ‘of Tufts.’ Perhaps to gain a more holistic understanding of Tufts’ creative ecosystem, it’s necessary to consider these groups and their functions within campus social life.
So let’s dig in, and why not start with one of the biggest? “Tufts Memes for Quirky Queens” is a Facebook group presently consisting of nearly 4,300 members (and counting) and is open to any Tufts student (pending confirmation by a group admin). In this group, members post visual media with comical captions relating to college life. New content tends to appear on the page every few hours, streaming into members’ news feeds. While the group’s description requests that members post “OC” for original content, some posts are entirely produced by their creators while others borrow elements from popular online memes. Of course, regardless of content, the meme formula is present within each — a simple display of visual media, accompanied by stark black or white text and an ironically sloppy DIY aesthetic (think bad Photoshop meets Microsoft Office Word Art circa 2004).
Despite references to general meme culture, overall references on this page remain specific to life at Tufts — rejection from Brown, stir fry night at Carm, controversy over Greek life, Tony Monaco, etc. The essential impulse is not to offer nuances to the collective Tufts experience by sharing a unique perspective but rather to surface the latent, universal aspects of life at Tufts by hyperbolizing them. Comment, like, tag your friends; each post demands its own critique, allowing space for viewers to react.
The act of relying on popular metaphors to articulate one’s personal experience is not a novel concept; it’s something we do often in everyday conversation. As social creatures, we are constantly borrowing from a cultural ‘commons’ of linguistic devices — expressions, proverbs and clichés — to express ourselves and relate to one another.
“Tufts Memes” operates through exactly these means of appropriation, only in multiple systems — incorporating borrowed tropes from internet culture, Tufts culture, pop culture and the collective experiences of students in general. That said, perhaps the reason we so often neglect to mention meme communities when discussing arts-related groups on campus is not that they are not always visible to us, but rather that they are hidden in plain sight. They fit easily into our daily lives, drifting by on our newsfeeds, chiming into our ongoing internal monologues and aligning too closely with our identities as Tufts students to be examined objectively like the works we encounter in the physical world.
So, what does it mean when we post, look, like and share? What kind of art world might we be creating?
